An Adornment of Essential Explanations of the Two Realities According to the Four Tenets Namo munīndrāya! This brief exposition of the two realities has four parts. I. The Vaibhāṣika System According to the Treasury of Abhidharma, if the perception of a given phenomenon ends when the phenomenon is destroyed or conceptually deconstructed, that phenomenon is defined as a "relative reality." Phenomena that have this characteristic are, for example, a jug and the water it contains. When the jug is smashed into pieces, the mind that apprehended the jug is no longer active, and when the different particles of matter that comprise the water are conceptually removed, the mind that apprehended water is equally no longer active. This can also be illustrated by other examples, such as pillars and so forth. If the perception of a given phenomenon does not end when that phenomenon is destroyed or conceptually deconstructed, that phenomenon is defined as an "ultimate reality." Phenomena that possess this characteristic are, for example, form, subtle particles, and uncompounded phenomena. Here, "form" refers to a form that remains perceivable even when it is broken down into particles. Subtle particles and uncompounded phenomena are regarded as ultimate realities because these particles cannot be broken down any further, and because uncompounded phenomena do not change, regardless of the extent to which they are conceptually deconstructed. II. The Sautrāntika System In the Commentary on Valid Cognition, it is stated: Whatever is able to actually perform a function Is here said to exist in the ultimate sense. Everything else exists in a relative sense. These are explained to be particulars and universals. Accordingly, an ultimate reality is defined as any phenomenon that is capable of actually performing a function. Phenomena that possess this characteristic are, for instance, a jug, a pillar, and so forth. According to this tradition, the terms "ultimate reality," "impermanent phenomenon," "entity," "compounded phenomenon," and "particular" are synonyms and ontologically identical. This is because they assert that phenomena that are able to perform a function-such as benefiting or harming-are ultimate realities, and because they maintain that real entities are truly existent. A relative reality is defined as any phenomenon that is not capable of actually performing a function. Phenomena that possess this characteristic are, for instance, space and conceptual designations such as "being one" and "being different" with regard to any phenomenon. The terms "relative reality," "permanent phenomenon," "non-entity," "uncompounded phenomenon," and "universal" are all ontologically identical. Since in this tradition all uncompounded phenomena are relative realities, emptiness is also categorized as a relative reality. III. The Cittamātra System In terms of the defining characteristics of the two realities, their divisions, and so forth, Cittamātra is mostly in accord with the Svātantrika doctrine. However, the schools differ in their understanding of the instances of the two realities. According to the Cittamātra system, the fact that form is empty of outer phenomena and the fact that the imagined nature, which consists of imputations regarding the nature and attributes of appearances, is not established in terms of an individual characteristic are accepted as instances of ultimate reality. The proponents of Svātantrika do not maintain this. Furthermore, the proponents of Cittamātra assert that all ultimate realities are truly existent. This implies that whatever is a phenomenon of perfected or dependent nature is necessarily truly existent. Phenomena of perfected nature are truly existent because they are the final nature of phenomena. Phenomena of dependent nature are truly existent because they have the capacity to produce their own results. IV. The Madhyamaka System A. Svātantrika Madhyamaka Even though most assertions of the proponents of Svātantrika are similar to those of the Prāsaṅgika school, there are differences. For instance, according to Svātantrika, the defining characteristic of an ultimate reality is that it is that through which a valid cognition becomes a valid analytical cognition that discerns the final nature, and the defining characteristic of a relative reality is that it is that through which a valid cognition becomes a valid analytical cognition that discerns the conventional. In terms of instances of the two realities, forms and so forth, which are established as merely posited through their appearance to a non-defective mind, are asserted as instances of relative realities. An instance of an ultimate reality is the fact that, rather than being merely posited in that way, the object is not established from the perspective of its own nature. Furthermore, two kinds of relative realities are distinguished. Undistorted relative realities are defined as relative realities that exist just as they appear to a mind that takes them as their main appearing objects. Water, pillars, and jugs-as well as uncompounded phenomena, cognitions, and colors-are all instances of this. Distorted relative realities are defined as relative realities that do not exist in the way they appear to a mind that takes them as their main appearing objects. Mirages, reflections in a mirror, magically created horses and oxen, and people in dreams are instances of this. Besides these points, there are many subtle differences in the way that Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika distinguish the two realities. B. Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka 1. DISTINGUISHING THE TWO REALITIES For Prāsaṅgika, the basis of distinction is the object of cognition. In this respect, phenomena are categorized as either one of the two realities and as either real or false. If, upon a given basis, real existence is excluded and negated, it is determined and proven to be false. If something is determined and proven to be false, its real existence is excluded and negated, for these two are in direct opposition in the sense of being mutually exclusive. All phenomena possess two natures: their lack of inherent existence is their ultimate nature and their conventional existence is their relative nature. An ultimate reality is therefore defined as that which is found by a valid analytical cognition that discerns the final nature. An instance of this is the lack of inherent existence of a seedling. A valid cognition that discerns the final nature is a valid cognition that induces the discernment of ultimate reality. It is the valid cognition that sees the ultimate nature of form and so forth. However, it is appropriate to say that the object of an ārya buddha's valid cognition that discerns ultimate reality is not identical with the object of a general valid cognition that discerns ultimate reality. 2. EXPLANATION OF THEIR RESPECTIVE NATURES When ultimate reality is differentiated from the perspective of its nature or the basis of emptiness, one distinguishes between the subtle selflessness of the individual and the subtle selflessness of phenomena. One also speaks of the sixteen kinds of emptiness in this context. When it is differentiated from the perspective of the various ways of communication, there are two types: the ultimate reality that is enumerable and the ultimate reality that is not enumerable. Generally speaking, the former comprises two aspects: the ultimate reality of an accepted object and the ultimate reality of the subject. An example of the first is the illusory appearance aspect of a seedling that is devoid of true existence. An example of the second is the inferential valid cognition that cognizes this. These are merely designated as ultimate reality, as they are not ultimate realities in an actual sense. The latter can also be terminologically differentiated in terms of the ultimate reality of the object and the ultimate reality of the subject. The first refers, for instance, to emptiness. Here, the terms "ultimate reality," "the way things are," "emptiness," "the perfected," "the extent of reality," and "dharmadhātu" are all ontologically identical. The second is, for example, the wisdom cognition in the mind stream of a learner that directly perceives emptiness. Even though some say that this is a true non-enumerable ultimate reality, it is not an ultimate reality in an actual sense. A relative reality is defined as an object of a valid cognition that discerns the conventional nature. An instance of this would be a seedling. A valid cognition that discerns the conventional nature is a valid cognition that induces the discernment of relative reality. Regarding the categories of relative reality, even though the Prāsaṅgika tradition does not generally differentiate relative reality in terms of undistorted and distorted, this distinction is made in terms of the worldly perspective. This means that, even though a mind that has an object is [by definition] affected by ignorance as a deeper cause of delusion, these categories are posited on the basis of whether or not it is affected by a more superficial cause of delusion. Relative reality is not subdivided, because the distinction of whether it exists as it appears does not apply: if it is a relative reality, it does not necessarily exist as it appears. 3. ETYMOLOGIES A jug's emptiness of true existence is called an "ultimate reality" because it is real from the perspective of an ultimate mind-that is, the wisdom cognition of equipoise that directly cognizes emptiness-and because it is real in an ultimate sense. The wisdom cognition of equipoise is called an "ultimate subject" because it sees its object-ultimate reality-as it is. A jug is called a "relative reality" because it is real from the perspective of the relative mind, which apprehends phenomena as truly existent, and because it is false when compared to the way things really are. Apprehending things as truly existent is called "relative" because it obstructs the seeing of reality. 4. ARE THE TWO REALITIES THE SAME OR DISTINCT? The two realities cannot be distinct in nature, because they would then be separate phenomena without any relation. It would then follow that the cultivation of the view that the jug is empty of true existence would be incapable of eliminating the apprehension of true existence. They are also not the same, without any difference; if they were, it would follow that by seeing the jug, its ultimate nature would be directly realized. If this were maintained, it would follow that even the visual cognition of ordinary beings directly realizes emptiness. This cannot be accepted, because the generation of the ārya paths would then be futile. The two realities are therefore of one nature but distinct isolates mutually dependent on each other. It is important to understand that all phenomena are empty of inherent existence and that emptiness is posited on the basis of these phenomena. 5. THE PURPOSE OF ASCERTAINING THE TWO REALITIES Thus, the purpose of knowing the system of the two realities is to know the intent of the Victorious One's discourses and to awaken by completing the accumulations. Also, to realize ultimate reality one must posit the relative reality of conventional designations in a certain manner. Furthermore, knowing the basis, the systematic presentation of the two realities, one engages in the path by gathering the two accumulations in order to accomplish the result, the two kāyas. This is the connection. Those who do not know this are therefore mistaken. As the glorious Candrakīrti states: Conventional reality is the means, And ultimate reality is that which is attained through it. Those who do not know how to distinguish the two Enter bad paths due to their mistaken notions. It is therefore essential to ascertain the actual nature of the two realities by means of scripture and reasoning. This is an essential topic. Śubham. 
